♪
Last season
onStar Trek: Discovery...
Pull up Kwejian
on the deep space array.
-BURNHAM: What happened?
-My ship was hit by something.
BOOK:
Kwejian. They're all gone.
Introducing the next-generation
spore drive.
We have 94 seconds
before they realize it's gone
and figure out
I'm the one who took it.
Next part's all you.
Book, no.
What happens with him?
With Book?
He violated multiple
Federation statutes.
He launched an isolytic weapon.
BOOK:
I got the news about my future.
Federation is sending me
to help families
displaced by the DMA.
I'm sorry, Michael.
I have long told myself
that balancing duty
and personal relationships
was not possible.
I believe now that I was being
dishonest with myself.
It is worth the effort
for the right individual.
I can understand that an offer
to teach at the Academy
is unlikely to fall
on willing ears.
But the opening is there.
You want to go back, don't you?
I do.
-Why?
-Started wondering
if this is what I really wanted,
or if I just really wanted
to be seen.
I think it could be a useful
perspective for a teacher.
BURNHAM: Book, I don't know
how to say bye.
Say "Kwakoni Yiquan."
It means something like
"We've parted a hundred times.
May we rejoin
to part a hundred more."
BURNHAM:
Kwakoni Yiquan it is.
♪
[shouts, laughs]
[whoops]
Never a dull moment.
SARU:
Captain, are you all right?
Surprisingly,
I'm not dead yet. [grunts]
Focus on our team, I'll try
to take out their engines,
and we can get back
whatever was in that vault.
COMPUTER:
Warning.
Warp level stability at 70%.
Oh, come on.
-50%.
-That was fast.
Mr. Saru?
SARU: We are on our way
to get you, Captain.
[rapid beeping]
COMPUTER:
Warning. Warp failure imminent.
This is not what I expected
when the night started.
[grunting]
ADIRA: And all this time,
I thought it was
a Tellarite term of endearment.
[laughter]
-Tonic 2161?
-Oh.
ROSS: It's the official cocktail
of the Millennium Celebration.
[all oohing]
Is, uh-- I don't get it.
2161. Founding
of the Federation.
It's been a thousand years.
ROSS:
Give or take a few decades,
to be specific.
Hard to celebrate
during the Burn.
I get the whole millennium part,
but what are the little,
-tiny, floaty things?
-ROSS: Oh, those are stars.
Like the Federation logo.
Blue with stars, see?
And they taste
like jumja sticks.
ADIRA:
Sold.
-Thanks.
-Thank you.
It's good to see
the Federation back, isn't it?
And at peace.
-It really is.
-Yeah.
STAMETS:
I think I'm gonna head back.
-I'm just tired.
-CULBER: Paul, no.
You said you wouldn't let it
ruin your evening.
He just found out
they're shuttering
the spore drive program.
STAMETS:
I mean, come on.
"Luminary"?
What am I supposed to do,
walk around, shake hands
and pretend I'm happy
-that the pathway drive won out?
-Yes.
I mean, it does mean
that Discovery
will always be one of a kind.
That's pretty cool, right?
Think I'd rather that my legacy
hadn't been destroyed
along with Book's ship.
I would have figured out
the navigator problem someday,
and then we could've rolled it
out to the whole fleet.
And who knows
if I'll ever do anything
that meaningful again.
You will.
BURNHAM:
It's a new world, Paul,
and you will find new purpose.
We all will.
-To change.
-CULBER: To change.
-Excuse me, Captain.
-Mm.
President Rillak is asking
if you can come
-meet some of the dignitaries.
-Mm-hmm.
Duty calls. [chuckles]
Of course.
I shouldn't have mentioned Book.
It's been months since she's
even talked about him. It's...
Locking something away
and moving on
are two very different things.
TILLY: I think there's
some other stuff, too,
but she's good.
Really.
She's, um...
Um, I-I have to go,
but I'll see y'all.
Hmm.
ADIRA:
So, are we mingling?
Or are we going back?
"Science Luminary" it is.
♪
[indistinct chatter]
You have news, Saru.
Do you intend
to share it with me
or will I be forced
to mind-meld?
[laughs softly]
President Rillak
would like me to serve
as a Federation ambassador.
I would be assigned
to a coalition
of smaller worlds,
ensuring their needs
are addressed
as the Federation
continues to expand.
She does not wish to repeat
the mistakes of the past.
An effort that is
most appreciated.
Particularly given the location
of some of those worlds.
If they were to fall
into the influence
of the Tholian Republic
or the Breen Imperium...
Indeed, it is imperative
that we remain unified.
Yet, you are uncertain
about her offer.
I would need to resign
my Starfleet commission.
However, I would be based here
at Federation Headquarters,
and since your duties
often bring you here as well...
I should not factor
into your decision, Saru.
I mean to say that while
we may love one other deeply,
the logical choice
is to remove our relationship
from consideration
so you may clearly evaluate
which is more meaningful:
this new position,
or your current role
in Starfleet.
Yes. O-Of course.
-Admiral.
-Captain.
What does this mean?
You're done shaking hands.
Apologies for intruding
on what I'm sure
was an invigorating evening.
I'll need that back.
-Secure location?
-We call it the Infinity Room.
A bit theatrical for my taste,
but some like
that sort of thing.
Admiral?
An 800-year-old science vessel
was just found at the edge
of the Beta Quadrant.
Dr. Kovich needs Discovery
to jump there immediately
-and secure it.
-What's on board?
Something vital to the security
of the Federation.
That doesn't answer my question.
I'm aware.
Sir,
-I cannot...
-KOVICH: Captain.
This is a Red Directive.
I'll get my crew.
FEMALE VOICE [over comm]: All
personnel report to stations.
Repeat: All personnel
report to stations.
Prepare for immediate departure.
-Status report.
-Dedicated comms line
into Federation Headquarters
is set.
Channel is secure.
The spore drive system
is on standby.
DOTs are in the loading bay
if needed.
Target location scans
are complete.
I've got another Starfleet
vessel in the sector.
Hasn't arrived yet.
All sensors are calibrated
and function is nominal.
Weapons locked and loaded,
standing by for black alert.
DETMER:
Loading bays are closed,
all personnel are back on board.
Coordinates are set.
We're ready for anything.
Excellent work, all of you.
Captain.
Thank you, everyone,
for gathering so quickly.
We will be taking Dr. Kovich
on a classified mission.
And be advised,
this is a Red Directive.
We will be jumping
to an uninhabited planet.
Its gravitational well has
turned it a graveyard of sorts
for debris of all kinds.
Our target is a Romulan
science vessel,
last seen 800 years ago.
A Starfleet probe just found it.
There's an item on board
that we cannot allow
to fall into the wrong hands.
Scavengers in the area monitor
comms and probe signals.
They will most certainly
be drawn to this.
Most are armed
and some are very dangerous.
Admiral Vance already has
a ship en route.
We will arrive first.
Black alert.
♪
[exhales]
Breathable atmosphere, my ass.
It smells like a tomb in here.
[exhales]
It's better than
wearing a helmet.
The USS Antaresagain?
Yeah, and they got
a second ship coming.
Whatever's here
must be extra shiny.
How long do you think we have?
-Eight minutes?
-Yeah.
That's it. This is where
all the backup power is going.
Whatever Starfleet doesn't want
us to have, it's in there.
[device beeping]
How'd that ship
get here so fast?
Doesn't matter.
Moll, wait.
We've yanked everything
we need from this heap.
What do you say?
Early to bed, holodeck for two?
L'ak.
Do you want the pebbles
or the mountain?
Okay. Let's do this.
BURNHAM: Bring the Romulan
vessel up on viewscreen.
OWOSEKUN:
Captain, scans had detected
two life signs on board,
but they just disappeared.
Perhaps they left.
Or cloaked themselves.
Rhys, Owosekun, with me.
We'll keep phasers on stun.
KOVICH:
That might not
be sufficient.
Sir, lethal force
is only authorized...
Captain, I don't care
who's over there
or what happens to them.
Secure that ship
by any means necessary.
And make sure
this mission succeeds.
♪
[original Star Trektheme
plays]
♪
-[whispers]: Clear.
-OWOSESKUN: Clear.
RHYS:
Clear.
Commander Rhys?
Can't have left long ago.
I'm picking up
aerosolized water droplets.
Track their path.
And let's keep phasers
set to stun.
RHYS: This way. Their trail
leads around the corner.
Go.
We've got something over here.
Clear.
800 years, waiting to be found.
RHYS: Someone destroyed the
cloaking device on this vault.
How long since the life signs
disappeared?
4.6 minutes.
Empty.
Even with modern technology,
Romulan encryption takes
longer to break than that.
RHYS:
Which means they're still here.
[grunts]
RHYS:
Captain, I can't move.
OWOSEKUN:
Neither can I.
BURNHAM:
Be right back.
You have nowhere to go.
My ship is out there
and another is coming.
Let's talk.
MOLL:
Fine.
You want to talk?
We'll talk.
Let us go
and no one gets scuttered.
Hand that over first.
This doesn't have
to end badly for you.
It won't.
[device beeping]
[beeping rapidly]
[grunts]
Saru, the hull is breached.
Owo and Rhys are trapped
and losing life support.
Ooh. That didn't feel good.
We are extracting
them now, Captain.
Give us a moment
to lock onto you.
Wait. No, Saru.
I've got it. I see them.
Activate suit magnetization.
SARU:
Captain.
Wow! [laughs]
Never a dull moment.
Captain, are you all right?
Surprisingly, I'm not dead yet.
[grunts]
Focus on our team, I'll try
to take out their engines
so you can come pick me up
and we can get back
whatever was in that vault.
This is not what I expected
when the night started.
[grunts]
Whoever you are up there,
identify yourself.
RAYNER: This is Captain Rayner
of the USSAntares.
I see you started without me.
[laughs]
Well, we needed some excitement.
-Thank you for the assist.
-RAYNER: How close are you
to taking out their engine?
I just need a few minutes.
RAYNER:
Well, we're not letting them go,
so you do what you need to do.
COMPUTER: Warning:
warp bubble stability at 70%.
Come on, come on.
-50%.
-That was fast.
The warp bubble's
collapsing, Captain.
Their ship could be torn apart.
You have to release
your tractor beam.
RAYNER: I'm not letting
them go, Captain.
Then reverse engines
and pull them out of warp.
RAYNER:
If I had a pathway drive,
maybe, but we're still making do
with Burn tech out here.
The ship can't take much more.
And I would rather
not die out here.
I've got a saxophone lesson
to get to.
RAYNER: My engineering team's on
it. We'll figure it out in time.
Glad one of us is confident.
[metal creaking]
COMPUTER:
Warp bubble stability at 32%.
Whoa. Rayner, come on.
Just let them go.
RAYNER: I've dealt
with these two before.
If they get away, we won't
track them down anytime soon.
Mr. Saru?
SARU: We are on our way
to get you, Captain.
Commanders Owosekun and Rhys
are being examined in sickbay.
Commander Detmer,
take us in as close as you can.
-Aye, Mr. Saru.
-Lieutenant Gallo,
prepare to beam the captain
to safety the moment
she is free of the warp bubble.
-Aye, Mr. Saru.
-Hang on.
SARU:
Lieutenant Naya, report?
NAYA: Structural integrity
is holding, Mr. Saru.
SARU:
Uh, Dr. Kovich,
perhaps you would be
more comfortable
in the ready room?
I'll be perfectly comfortable
when you've completed
your mission.
[explosion]
As you wish.
Captain Rayner,
if this ship gets ripped apart
when the warp bubble collapses,
then the Antares
will be destroyed, too.
RAYNER:
That's why they're pushing this.
They're counting on me
backing off.
COMPUTER:
Warning. Warp failure imminent.
Damn it. Come on.
RAYNER: Get out, get safe.
I've got this.
No, no, you don't.
You made this personal.
RAYNER:
Every mission's personal.
It's called doing my job.
And don't preach at me.
I've heard plenty of stories
about you.
SARU:
Captain, you must exit
the bubble for us
to get a lock on you.
Come on, let them go, Rayner.
We can track
their warp signature.
Let them go before you and
your crew are out of options.
Come on.
RAYNER:
Ugh. Damn it.
Releasing tractor beam.
Mr. Saru!
SARU: We are locking
onto you now, Captain.
[panting]
-You lost them.
-We'll find them.
I have Captain Rayner for you.
Put him through.
That cherry that they just
dropped on our shit sundae
left us with 20 warp signatures
all charting different courses.
Mr. Saru?
Uh, unfortunately,
it will likely take several days
to determine which signature
belonged to their vessel.
By which time
they'll be long gone.
This is the part
where you tell me
you have a brilliant idea.
I know someone
who can find them.
[indistinct announcement
over comms]
Permission to come aboard,
Captain?
The warp signature trick.
Same kind we used
on the Scaptar job.
You think they used
to be couriers.
Federation's expanding, most
of the old networks are closed.
Not how I'd choose
to make a living, but...
So that's why you asked
for me, then?
See if I could sniff out which
is the real warp signature?
You have experience,
expertise and insight.
That was a lot of very
professional words, Michael.
I'm sorry.
It's okay.
It has been a while.
Yeah.
It has.
I hear you're doing
really good work, Book.
Helping the refugees,
rebuilding after the DMA.
I go where the Federation
tells me.
Today they said here.
Whatever it takes
to make things right.
After you.
RAYNER:
These two are quite a pair.
They're smart, slippery as hell,
don't give a damn
about anyone but themselves.
Meet Moll and L'ak.
Showed up in the sector
approximately two years ago.
No idea where they were
before that.
BOOK:
What did they steal?
BURNHAM:
A tan zhekran.
A traditional
Romulan puzzle box.
It was secured
in a cloaked vault.
The scientist it belonged to
was long dead.
Any idea what was inside?
No.
Dr. Kovich, any context
would only help our mission.
I'm not at liberty
to share details.
I'm sorry, Admiral.
Mr. Booker, I'm told
you might be able to point us
in the right direction
with all of these warp trails.
Well, my mind-reading skill's
a little rusty,
but if I were still in the game
and scored something that
everyone in Starfleet was after,
definitely wouldn't
take it anywhere
in Federation territory.
And 24th century,
only a few fences
would even look at haul
from that far back.
Q'mau.
Dealer there loves
the old stuff.
Goes by the name of Fred.
Fred...
Just Fred.
Mm.
Ah.
Captain Burnham, Captain Rayner,
set a course for Q'mau.
Uh, take Mr. Booker with you
since he's familiar
with your contact there.
Get in, get out, no noise.
Aye.
My mission or hers?
Why don't you try
working together?
[exhales]
Should take an hour at warp.
I'll meet you there.
Don't start without me.
Good luck, Captain.
Mm.
Mr. Saru?
[sighs]
We've been on our share
of clandestine missions,
but this...
Even Admiral Vance
is out of the loop?
Ah, I noticed that as well.
A tan zhekrancould
contain anything, right?
A weapon, a pathogen,
but the databases
won't tell me as much
as the Romulan's name.
Well, perhaps someone
with access
to different databases
may be able to assist?
Someone no longer within
Discovery'schain of command?
[laughs]:
Oh.
I'll miss you, if you take
that diplomatic post.
President Rillak spoke with you?
She'd be lucky to have you.
There is much to consider.
But for now... Fred.
Fred.
You have the conn.
Yeah, but that's the whole point
of Simulation Week,
doing the rotations
so cadets get the experience
of actually being on a ship.
Why would she not
leave your lab?
I don't know, she didn't say.
Maybe she's shy?
[sighs]
They can't all be shy.
Being a part of a crew,
being where you need to be
when you need to be,
that-that's Starfleet.
And we have so many
new missions coming up.
It's a conundrum, yeah.
I mean, what that could mean
for the missions.
Exactly. That's exactly it.
It's like what it means
to be a crew.
I can't crash all these kids
onto an ice moon
in order to teach them that.
Right? Could I? No.
It's not, it's not feasible.
Is it?
Uh, pretty sure it's not, no.
Cool. No.
Yeah, no, no, no, no.
[laughs]
Shut up, champagne.
Why did they wait
till all the after-parties
to give that to us?
They should've been passing
that out to the delegates
-before they left, you know?
-Yeah.
A little diplomacy?
[chuckles]
Is it warm in here?
I don't know. Is it?
Oh.
Okay, um, yeah--
Well, m-- actually,
maybe I have a fever.
You should go
before you catch it.
-Oh. Yeah? Okay.
-Yeah. Yeah.
Um, plus, I have,
I have tests to grade.
-So, um, yeah.
-Okay. Sure.
But thank you
for walking me back.
And yeah, if you ever
wanted to do it again,
-like walk-- walk or talk or...
-Yeah?
-Oh, well, I-I love...
-Yeah.
-...walking and talking, so...
-Do you?
-Yes.
-Good. Great.
-Very much. Okay.
-Okay, well, cool.
Bye.
Goodbye.
Computer? Coffee.
Strong. Large.
Now.
-[exhales]
-BURNHAM: Tilly, it's me.
-You got a minute?
-Michael!
Where-- How are you?
Where are you?
[grunts]
It's warm in here, isn't it?
You're not here. But it is warm.
You should take my word
for that.
BURNHAM:
You had the Andorian champagne.
I did.
But now I have coffee.
And you have Serious Voice.
What's up?
BURNHAM:
I could use some help,
but you should feel free
to say no.
I will not say no.
Whatever it is, I'm in.
♪
[indistinct chatter]
[laughs]
Feels like old times.
You, me, a courier backwater.
All that's missing is Grudge.
How is she, by the way?
You know, I haven't heard
from you, so...
Yeah, queen's great.
She says hi.
Yeah. Um...
But I'm pretty sure
the silence was on you.
Actually, I'm pretty sure
it wasn't.
I love the feeling
of interrupting something.
You two need a moment?
Not at all. We're good.
You sure?
'Cause we got a job to do.
-I said we're good.
-Can't keep your eyes
-on the job, then...
-We're good.
[laughs]
Okay.
[laughter]
[indistinct chatter]
♪
[doors close]
FRED:
Welcome.
How effervescent
to meet new clients.
Pardon my friends here
as they remove
any weaponry
from your possession.
They are quite protective
of my being.
Fair enough.
BODYGUARD:
They're clear.
Good, good.
I am Fred.
Moll.
This is L'ak.
And you are togetherness, yes?
Both of your names
with their low vowel sounds.
Simpatico.
An ever-fixed mark.
But the bilabial nasal of M-oll
contrasted with the voiceless
velar plosive of L'ak-k...
Interesting.
[whispers]:
Spicy.
How can we make an excellent
deal today, Moll and L'ak?
Well, we came across
some choice vintage tech.
Heard it was your kind of thing.
Indeed, you have voyaged
to the correct locale.
L'AK:
We've got...
isolinear coprocessors,
vintage padds and tricorders--
still functional--
self-sealing stem bolts
and, um...
...this thing.
Intriguing.
I have not encountered
one of these
for 622.7 years.
Do you think you can open it?
[clicks]
♪
It is in surprisingly
good condition.
No evidence of dry rot,
book lice-- order Psocoptera--
or beetles--
countless variations
of family, genus and species.
Of course, I could count them,
but we do not have the entirety
of this day, now, do we?
Therefore, I will take these.
The lot of it, if you like.
Three bars of latinum.
Pleasure doing business
with you both.
-[laughs]
-I was not aware
I had expressed
a humorous sentiment.
You didn't.
It's just that, uh,
it's been a while since
we've seen a synth...
...anxious.
MOLL:
Offer's too low.
We'll find another place
to hawk it.
These items
will not be returned.
You may now exit this premises.
No.
That's not how we do business.
[grunting]
[weapon whirring]
-[Moll shouts]
-Moll!
Don't... you... ever...
hurt... her.
L'ak! L'ak. [panting]
I'm fine.
-I'm fine.
-Are you sure?
Nothing some hypospray
won't fix.
-Are you sure?
-Yeah.
I hope it was painful.
[indistinct chatter]
BOOK: This isn't the kind of
place you leave the door open.
You thinking what I'm thinking?
-Yeah, Rigel Five.
-Vintar Four.
RAYNER:
I'm thinking "Let's go."
Can we go?
Still warm.
Can't be far.
You know,
we should stick together.
Book knows this place.
It'll give us
a tactical advantage.
We'll cover more ground
splitting up.
Can't say he's indecisive.
There's that.
Mr. Saru,
they killed the dealer,
but he may know something
that could help us,
so can you beam him up and have
a team scan his memory?
And find out
if he has family here?
We should notify them.
SARU:
Right away, Captain.
Okay. You're Moll and L'ak.
What's your next move?
Get to my ship, fast as I can.
Okay, but they wouldn't have
landed in space dock.
That's too visible.
-So it's probably cloaked.
-Mm-hmm.
Waiting outside the settlement.
BOTH:
The sand runners.
STAMETS:
So, this is Fred.
He's a surprisingly old model.
Dozens of generations
before the kind of tech
used for Gray's body.
Incredible.
Imagine the engineering,
the circuitry...
To have functioned for so long.
All right, Fred,
what can you tell us
about yourself?
Here's the internal
memory drive.
Serial number AS-0572Y.
A.S.
-Altan Soong.
-Hmm?
Well, he was based
on Dr. Soong's design,
so whoever built Fred
honored the doctor
by putting his initials
in the serial number.
Centuries later
and we still speak his name.
What a legacy.
Anyhow, uh...
a memory drive this old will
have a lot of delicate wiring,
so i-it's gonna take time
before we can get in there,
uh, let alone download any data.
Well, we haven't used wires
since way before the upgrade.
We're gonna need
more replicators.
Oh, no, we're good.
You married a pack rat. I...
saved a few things.
I'll be right back.
CULBER:
Oh, Fred.
Hmm.
They're on sand runners,
bearing 28 degrees north
of our landing site.
BOOK: We rented three of them.
Let's go.
How the hell
did you get here so quick?
Shortcut through
the spice market.
One of those
strategic advantages.
Well, good of you to keep up.
Oh, I haven't disliked someone
this much in 930 years.
Beat him there, save the day.
That'll take the edge off.
256 Q-bit shifting
fractal encryption,
prepare to kiss
my caffeinated ass.
Lieutenant Sylvia Tilly,
step away from the console.
What? You m--
This console, or...?
You're attempting to break into
a secure Federation database
in violation of Security
Protocol Six Alpha.
I'll take it from here,
Officers.
You heard me. You can leave.
Yes, sir.
Sir, I can explain...
Captain Burnham asked you
to do this, didn't she?
No, no, no. She didn't ask me
to hack into
the Federation database.
That was all me.
But I do think
that she deserves to know
what's so important about
an 800-year-old Romulan ship
that they're all risking
their lives for it.
I agree.
You do?
Even for a Red Directive,
this has been unusual.
Looks like you were close
to unlocking the file
that could give us some insight.
Seconds away, sir,
I j-- I just need
to execute the algorithm and...
Oh.
Shame we didn't get
to stop you in time.
[laughs softly]
VELLEK:
This is Dr. Vellek.
I am...
[sound distorts]
...and critical systems
are offline.
In the event that I am lost,
the knowledge I possess
must not be.
...an ancient technology
beyond all comprehension,
of which I have hidden...
...in the shadow
of twin moons...
The full scope of my knowledge
is recorded here.
This power cannot fall
into the wrong hands,
or we may all be doomed.
BOOK: I've got Moll
and L'ak on the scope.
There's an occlusion under
the sand two kilometers away.
Has to be their ship.
We need to get to them
before they get there!
Back me up! I got this.
Did he just take off again?
Yeah. Kind of
reminds me of someone.
I'm trying to put
my finger on who.
I'm holding a phaser.
You know that, right?
Right.
RAYNER:
They got to their ship.
-BURNHAM: Stay on them.
-BOOK: Working on it.
They're heading into
the mountains, not into space.
-Why?
-The tunnels.
No idea what you're
talking about.
If they go up, Discovery
and Antarescan intercept.
But there's a network of tunnels
in those mountains.
They could lose us inside and
come out far away, undetected.
And you're just
telling me this now?
Come on. More driving,
less talking.
Owosekun, can you get me
scans of the tunnel system?
That will take a minute,
but I've got a pretty good idea
which one they're
planning to go into.
-How?
-There's an explosive charge
at the entrance.
It's armed.
Ah, so they planned ahead
in case
we followed them. Clever.
Ha! If I didn't hate
these guys, I might like them.
An explosion up there
would cause an avalanche.
-Mr. Saru?
-Uh, Zora estimates
the probability at 30%.
It would decimate
the settlement.
Can you beam me to the cave?
I need to disarm the device.
They'll vaporize you before
you pull up your holopadd.
Better idea
is to blow it from here.
Block the entrance,
we take away their escape route.
No. No, we can't risk killing
all those people down there.
You're letting stats
get in the way of strategy.
An avalanche
is not gonna happen.
Even if they end up
in the tunnels,
they have to come out
eventually.
We will grid-scan
the atmosphere.
When they go off-world,
we've got a good shot
at catching them.
A good shot? Come on.
Booker, you were a courier,
you know how this goes.
Back me up here.
The further I am from this,
the better.
They're almost there.
Antares,lock target.
No, we are on
a non-Federation planet,
on a classified mission.
Our mission is to get back
whatever they stole.
Antares,
-fire!
-No, don't!
Mr. Saru?
Scans confirm
that the mountainside
remains stable.
70% for the win.
[whoops]
Not for long.
They just armed
a photon torpedo.
-What?
-You gave them an idea.
BURNHAM:
Avalanche!
RAYNER:
Turn around!
ZORA: Captain, Mr. Saru,
the avalanche is reaching speeds
of 200 kilometers an hour
with an impact pressure
of 50 tons per square meter.
-SARU: Can we evacuate?
-ZORA: I'm sorry to report
there's not enough time.
BURNHAM:
Saru, we need to do something!
SARU: I have teams already
working on it, Captain.
We don't have much time.
SARU:
We are acutely aware.
[engine revving]
Michael!
BOOK:
Hey, you okay?
Yeah. Could be worse.
-Could be jumping off a cliff.
-[Book chuckles]
The day's not done yet.
Discovery,we have
to stop that avalanche.
What's your status?
SARU: Commander Stamets,
have you found a solution?
STAMETS:
One more minute.
Can we create a force field
-around the settlement?
-Uh, not enough time,
not enough power.
Uh, what if we fired
at the ground,
-superheated the silica?
-Yeah, the resulting fulgurites
wouldn't be nearly
strong enough to stop it.
Wait, uh, what if we, uh,
set a different kind of break
in the avalanche's path?
Using what, the boulders?
I was maybe thinking a...
starship?
STAMETS:
Even with all available power
going to shields,
Discovery couldn't do it alone.
Uh, what about with the Antares?
STAMETS:
Well, both ships
would need to arrive
simultaneously,
but that could work.
I think?
I hope. Let's go with "hope."
Well, it's the only plan
we've got, so let's do it.
[engine revs]
Lieutenant Christopher,
contact the Antares
and have them follow our lead.
-Aye, Mr. Saru.
-Commander Detmer,
-get ready.
-Aye, Mr. Saru.
Can Commander Owosekun track
the scavengers' ship
at the same time?
We will return to the pursuit
as soon as we are able, Doctor.
Mr. Saru, the Antaressaid
that Captain Rayner
ordered them to stay the course.
As soon as both of our ships
leave orbit,
we'll lose Moll and L'ak again.
And if you don't order your crew
to help us, thousands will die.
They are the mission right now.
RAYNER:
Shit.
Antares,change of plans.
Captain Burnham, you're up.
Antares, Discovery,
this is Captain Burnham.
We've got one shot at this.
Let's work together
and make it count.
♪
BURNHAM:
Saru, where are you?
SARU:Discovery is
almost there, Captain.
-[indistinct chatter]
-[panicked screaming]
Commander Detmer, take us in
at a 26-degree inclination.
-Aye, Mr. Saru.
-SARU: Commander Owosekun,
maximize power to deflectors
and prepare to initiate
-shield fusion with the Antares.
-Aye, Mr. Saru.
RHYS: Mr. Saru, I've got
two life signs out there.
Captain, there are two civilians
in the path of the avalanche.
[engine whirring]
I see them.
[engine revs]
Owosekun, can you get a lock?
The sand cloud is causing
too much interference.
The avalanche will overwhelm
them in the next ten seconds.
I'll give you their exact
coordinates. On my mark.
[screams]
Now!
-SARU: We got them.
-[grunts] Nice work.
DETMER:
I'm taking us in. Brace.
♪
[cheering]
[exhales]
Saru, how is everyone?
All crew members of both
vessels are safe, Captain.
Only a few minor injuries,
that is all.
We did it. Great work, everyone.
Rayner...
thank you.
[engine whooshes]
RAYNER:
And there go Moll and L'ak.
[exhales]
Damn it.
RAYNER:
Well, Captain,
wish I could say
it's been a pleasure, but...
Ah.
Well, this is it, I guess.
I'm glad we got
another mission together.
Yeah, me, too.
Although we both know
we should've done Vintar Four
back there.
Ah, I really should've called.
We both should have called.
It's weird.
What?
I'm not sure how
to be around you anymore.
[sighs]
Some things are hard
to move past.
For both of us.
Yeah, maybe we haven't wanted
to say that out loud.
Are we saying it now?
I think we are.
TILLY:
Captain, do you have a minute?
Yeah, Tilly, what's up?
Oh, you know,
just following up on the thing.
Is this a bad time?
Uh, um...
No, not at all.
Good, because I've got
some answers for you,
and they are wild.
-Saru.
-I appreciate you stepping away
to speak with me.
There are rumors of an incident.
Discoveryand another
Starfleet vessel.
Is everything all right?
It is, now.
There were several moments,
however... Uh...
A-- a settlement
was endangered.
Its inhabitants...
[sighs]
Well, there was little
they could have done
if we had not come to their aid.
I was reminded of
something
Lieutenant Tilly once said,
that life is just a blink.
This experience is causing you
to reflect upon
your own mortality.
Not-not quite, no. Um...
[exhales]
In my youth,
I struggled often with... love.
How to embrace those
who were destined
to be taken from me
in the cullings.
Until I met you,
I did not understand the degree
to which that fear
had constrained me.
Today, I...
I could not help
but imagine myself
in that settlement.
If I were to face
such horrors...
...I would only think of you.
So, you see,
it is impossible for me
to not consider our relationship
as I consider my future.
Discoveryis my home
and my family...
You...
are also my home.
My family.
And somehow, so much more.
I am going to accept
President Rillak's offer.
I want to be with you, always.
I had dared to hope that
you would make such a decision.
If I may,
I do believe it would
be only logical,
given this development,
for us to codify
our mutual commitment
in a more official capacity.
Oh.
T'Rina...
Are you asking me to marry you?
I believe that is the language
some cultures use for it.
[exhales]
Oh.
[doors whoosh open]
CULBER:
Captain, are you all right?
Oh, I'm-I'm fine.
I was just talking to Tilly.
I haven't had
a chance to change.
What did we find out?
Well, something, uh,
pretty fascinating, really.
We were able to download
the last 15 teraquads
of data from
his ocular processing unit,
and he got a pretty good look
at the diary.
BURNHAM:
Zora, can you slow that down?
ZORA:
Of course, Captain.
Freeze on that last image.
Can you zoom in on that?
Twin moons.
It's in the Vileen system.
I need to talk to Kovich.
[thunder rumbling]
Dr. Kovich.
You're looking for a planet
with twin moons.
This is the wrong planet.
I know about the distress call,
Dr. Kovich.
I've seen the Romulan's diary.
Isn't that enough
to convince you
to tell me what it all means?
Your tenacity
is admirable, Captain,
but that information
remains classified.
How many more lives
are you willing to risk
to keep it that way?
Respectfully, sir,
I can't keep doing
my mission in the dark.
Then you'll be relieved to know
it's no longer your mission.
This Red Directive
is bigger than me.
It's been classified
for centuries.
It's more important
than you can imagine.
I need to send a team.
You already have one.
So you can keep searching holos
of every two-moon system
in the Federation databases,
and it might take you
a few hundred years,
or you can read me in.
What's it gonna be?
Reaching out to Lieutenant Tilly
was smart.
Perhaps it's best Admiral Vance
couldn't stop her in time.
Computer, deactivate hologram.
The Romulan's name
was Dr. Vellek.
One of the greatest scientists
of his day.
He was present
when a Starfleet captain,
Jean-Luc Picard,
found a message left
by a race of ancient beings.
We've been calling them
the Progenitors.
They created life as we know it.
Life as in...
You.
Me. Saru.
Every humanoid species
in the galaxy.
A few thousand years ago,
we'd have called them gods.
Somehow, Dr. Vellek
found their technology.
Whatever it was they used
to design life itself.
When he disappeared
800 years ago,
its location was lost with him.
Now, Moll and L'ak know
where it is
or the diary is the first piece
of the puzzle.
Either way, we have
to find it before they do.
In the wrong hands,
I-I can only imagine
how a technology this powerful
might be used.
There is a system in the outer
sector
of the Beta Quadrant, Vileen.
It doesn't have a planet
with two moons,
but one of its worlds, Lyrek,
has three moons,
two of which move
in perfect sync.
Twin moons? It's on Lyrek.
Yes, sir.
Well, Captain,
the greatest treasure in
the known galaxy is out there.
What are you waiting for?
Let's fly.
BURNHAM:
We're on a search for one of
the greatest powers ever known.
STAMETS:
The technology, it could have
incredible applications.
CULBER:
Protecting it...
-[roaring]
-What was that?
...nothing's more important.
Power of creation, here we come.
We are gonna find
the Progenitors' tech.
-Could have just said hello.
-You could have just
left us the hell alone.
It could be a suicide mission.
BURNHAM:
I'm afraid a lot.
Change can be hard.
We're on this quest to find
the thing that created us.
It's kind of beautiful,
in a twisted sort of way.
We're only gonna get one
shot at this. Make it count.
-This is insane.
-Here we go.
One last mission to say goodbye.
BOOK: What do you think
happens when we finally
put this thing together?
BURNHAM:
I don't know.
But I can't wait to find out.